I don't look at open AI as open AI I
look at open a as Microsoft it's mainly
funded by Microsoft in control so I look
at open as Bing versus bard
we're gonna do some big debates around
search around marketing and we have a
very special guest we've got Neil Patel
who's the co-founder of MP digital he is
General marketer and man about the
internet and we're going to talk
marketing today we're gonna talk about
AI we're gonna talk about a whole host
of things Neil welcome to the show yeah
thanks for having me Neil how quickly
you're going to change your LinkedIn
headline to man about the internet
I don't know I see a Neil Patel on the
internet a lot on the internet too
seemed like the right intro I wish
someone would describe me as mad about
the internet I love that here I know you
had a couple of things that you for sure
wanted to kick off with so I want to
hand it to you to get the debate started
today Neil you're one of the uh like
renan for many reasons but search is
definitely one of the things that you
have mastered and you've done a lot of
great takes so we were watching some of
your short form videos around chat EBT
the impact it has SEO and advertising so
we have had the spicy takes for like
three months right now that GPT is a
natural language layer on top of the
internet it is showing us that I chat
the chat experience has the experience
that most users predominantly are
starting to fall in love with and it
moves everything back a click to remove
the software back a click through the
new chat gbt app store it moves search
back a click and we think it's very very
disruptive for search and advertising
it'll be good to start to get your takes
I think you actually are maybe on the
opposite end of the spectrum and then we
can try to like convince each other that
who's right yeah who's right so I do see
AI as being a huge part of the future so
let's go back a little bit when most
people think about and let's focus
actually on chat GPT forget even just AI
let's actually just Chad gbt I know
because open AI is taking mostly Glory
right now when it comes to the press and
everything related to AI versus Bard or
anything else out there right now chat
GPT the way they end up spinning up
answers to you is by scraping the web in
essence they're crawling the web
Gathering all this information and then
using it for an output right the input
you know like if you think about back in
the day there was these things called
article Spinners article Spinners you
shove an article it shows you how to
Output based on the input you no longer
have to put in the input because it's
just scraping the web the issue though
if you think about this Google's been
around for more than 20 years a lot of
the search engines have been around for
ages anytime you guys do a search would
you guys agree with me not anytime but a
lot of times when you do a search
there's still misinformation out there
you get inaccurate information you can
type in anything inaccurate and and low
quality both for sure correct and
they've been trying to solve these
problems for call it 20 plus years I'm
making up a time frame but it's been way
more than 10 years since they've been
trying to solve it all right I know
people both uh Microsoft and Google and
Engineers literally trying to fight
misinformation this is why Eric Schmidt
back in the day the exeu of Google used
to talk about brands or how you sort out
the people from the Cesspool I'm
butchering his quote and what he would
talk about is Brands were less likely to
put out misinformation it's not always
true but it's more realistic that a
brand is going to do their fact checking
and they're going to put out less
misinformation again not always but in
theory that's what it's supposed to be
like so if your inputs are off your
outputs are going to be off because if
they haven't been able to figure out
what's misinformation and that's being
inputted into AI you're always going to
get out or not always for a portion of
the queries and the responses depending
on what you're looking for the AI to
spit out from an answer perspective
you're going to get misinformation as
well inaccurate wrong whatever it may be
now that's just from an article
standpoint I think there's a huge huge
huge aspect I was looking at a McKinsey
study the the real value in AI from a
revenue standpoint from businesses is a
lot of things like business processes
and efficiencies crunching analytics
from a marketing standpoint like when
you talk to a lot of the fortune 1000 if
you're less concerned about creating
content content cheap the consumer
though is always about like oh I can use
Chad GPT I need these tools to spit out
a contract or spit out an answer write a
song or a poem this is amazing and all
that stuff yeah I I think it's going to
do wonders for but going back to the
question about disrupting advertising
yeah I think a portion of the queries
are gonna end up disrupting advertising
for search but not for the majority
because the real Revenue generation from
Google and these search engines when
people are typing is for a lot of the
transactional keywords it's not how does
Google's algorithm work you know when
you look at back in the day when you
think about the knowledge graph people
are like oh that's going to disrupt
search because you're just getting the
answers unless people are going to click
but if you look at what Danny Sullivan
from Google has said since every year
Google's been around there's actually
have driven more clicks to websites I
think Google's gonna answer more queries
just like it did with knowledge graph or
what's the weather in Las Vegas Nevada I
just don't see it really disrupting
everything because the majority of the
ad dollars like we manage billions of
dollars in ad spend for companies the
majority is transactional keywords like
if you want to talk about search
specifically right it's not social just
search it really is transactional based
keywords where the majority of the
revenue is being spent on ad dollars I
agree with you on transactional keywords
there's a couple of things here there's
there's AI which we should talk about
and there's also cure you kind of
alluded to kind of this evolution of a
chat user experience and a preference
that's possibly going to be driven by
individuals and consumers to have a more
chat user experience versus a
traditional graphical user interface or
in Google's term like just a core search
box if we move to a more chat Centric
interface isn't the ad model like like
AdWords breaks a lot in that interface
like the actual experience of how you
discover ads does break though doesn't
it it does but for a lot of stuff like
if you're looking for a cheap laptop
you're still going to just see the ads
you don't want chat GPT to spit out an
answer Bard like here's the best cheap
laptop you're like yeah I don't know if
you're getting paid for this or what's
happening let me do my own research and
pick what laptop I want because what
works for you may not work for me I I do
agree it's going to change how search is
and how we function with it and it is
going to be a more chat based type of
model because what open AI did the most
amazing part is it's really good at
understanding what you're looking for
and giving you an output and that's the
amazing part about it yes there's a lot
more magic to it
I just don't see it disrupting too much
of the advertising yes you can say some
of the queries and there will be a
portion that are affected and I don't
know how they'll monetize but they can
either do what like Twitter is doing hey
we're going to charge you for a
verification we're going to charge you
to start using some of this after a
certain amount the Instagram members
were really crazy on the blue tick mark
what was it like 40 something million
people in the first 24 hours is what the
yeah there's a lot of buddies hundreds
of millions of dollars in Revenue in the
first day right yeah I think they said
660 million I didn't see an article from
Facebook verifying that but that's what
people are doing with the backup that's
the rumor so I do think that Google will
figure out other ways to monetize and I
do think this type of model will
actually cause us to use search more so
in theory you can say yes a portion of
the clicks will go away a portion of the
ad Revenue will go away but I actually
think this will create more usage of
Google and other search engines which
will cause a total volume to go up just
like what Danny Sullivan broke down in
which yeah you may end up losing things
from like Knowledge Graph or Bard or
chat GPT but if the number of people
using Google on a daily basis
continually increases there's still
traffic and volume to be had and
potentially more than there was from the
previous year Well I buy your argument
that AI is going to actually increase
adoption of people just like engaging
online looking and searching for things
the point that you're making that I want
everybody watching to understand is the
point you're actually making is look I
believe especially I'm paraphrasing you
I believe especially for transactional
keywords that choice matters in search
results that having a lot of choice and
a lot of options for those keywords so I
could do my own refinement and research
matters a lot I don't know if that's
going to be true or not but I think
that's the point you're making versus
getting one answer from a AI chatbot
you're like hey I want to see 10
different cheap laptops and I want to
pick the cheap laptop that has these
certain specs and things that I
particularly want is that where is that
where you're pushing on that's what I'm
pushing on so like let's say if you ask
it to create a contract for you right
it's not going to be perfect we I think
we can all agree 3 if you have chat GPT
create a contract for you you may
probably want to send it to a lawyer
first and I'm not saying this for today
I'm also saying this for two three four
five years from now as well because
again a lot of the inputs are off and
you may need things really customized to
your liking so yes you may be able to
save some money on legal expenses by
having a lawyer review versus creating
from scratch but there's ad
opportunities hey would you like a
lawyer to review this contract that you
just created through Bard or chat GPT
click a button here and we'll connect
you with the lawyer I think they'll also
start having new monetization methods
that Google will end up making money
from yeah we kind of break this down
into three core components which is
navigational queries informational
queries and transactional queries and
navigational queries are like I'm just
going to type the domain because I want
to navigate to that website we can kind
of do away with those and just think
about informational and transactional I
think an informational I think users and
maybe lazier than than you are
describing them Neil in that I I don't
think the average user cares as much
about the misinformation as they care
about the ease of use and I think the
one thing that chat has shown is that
users will always choose like ease of
use over anything else and that's why I
think it's the fastest growing app of
all time also because it just is like a
new thing right and people love you like
Clubhouse is one of the fastest growing
things of all time and it turned out it
was kind of garbage in the end but I do
think there's something in that which is
like when I think of the chat gbt
experience it provides a concise
formatted answer and I don't have to do
anything else because it just like gives
me it's like my assistant it goes
through the Blue Links it provides me
the answer in a way that I can easily
understand that and then I don't have to
do any other work and there's something
in that ease of use where users will
always gravitate towards the easier
thing but on their transaction I think
that's a really good point on
transactional which is like most of the
money on search and advertising is made
in transactional queries which is like
nearer nearest to the buy-in step
however I do think with the the new chat
tpd store it can start to like
cannibalize those very very quickly
because now I I can actually say hey
like plan out my trip to Barcelona
choose me the best things the best
restaurants applicable to me just go
book them I actually don't care how it's
booking them I don't care if it's using
OpenTable I don't care if it's using a
local provider I don't care how it
actually gets done because I'm a user
and I'm lazy right I just care that it's
done and then the other thing I booked
me a flight between 400 and 450 in the
background it can go execute that in any
of these slide providers I actually
don't care how it does it I just care
that it gets done within the kind of
price range that I've given with the
seat that I want with the air with the
time that I want and I do think that
there is something there that could
really start to cannibalize search
because now I don't need to actually go
and trawl through these links and like
search is predicated on the fact that
you have to query and you have to like
go through the Blue Links yourself so we
can interrupt you and try to get you to
click on the the advertising link I
think that's the either the bull case
for a chat versus search or the bear
case for search okay let's go back a
little bit you mentioned a great example
hey I want to book a trip let's say to
Paris pick me the best spots to visit
here's how many days I want to stay in a
hotel in this price range and I want a
flight in this price range and this is
the city I'm leaving from here's the
times I like to fly here are my
specifications on the seat if I need a
lay flat Bud if I'm just okay with the
windows seat whatever it may be right
you're giving the specifications right
now when you do the searches people are
clicking on the Blue Links and they're
making money to run chat GPT or run Bart
it is costing billions of dollars
there's no way Microsoft or Google or
let's look at just Microsoft Microsoft
put what 13 billion or something like
that into the company they didn't put
that money for no reason I don't know if
it's all cash or servers but this is
just an expensive process to run they're
not going to keep burning this money
without making money
they'll take a percentage of the
transaction so they can pay Bingo
tickets
but what I'm saying is that changes that
changes the way that thing is priced
because now it's priced than just I'm
the user I only care that it gets done
but I don't need to go and actually go
research myself I just carry you the AI
assistant go take my parameters and go
does it so it pushes the search
experience out of the user's purview and
puts chat as the only kind of layer in
between you and the thing getting done
but they'll still make money for them it
doesn't matter if they're charging per
click or part charging per transaction
if you look at Google and their history
they've tested the model of charging per
transactions before in various different
Industries they've also looked to count
by certain markets like mortgage and
flights and they've tested some of these
things why would Google win that if that
if that experience is like not what
Google has excelled at in the past which
is the Blue Links and it's a chat
experience I wonder why Google would win
that versus openai just dominate in that
and crushing Google in that experience I
don't look at open a as open AI I look
at open a as Microsoft
because the reality is it's mainly
funded by Microsoft in control so I look
at open a as Bing versus Bard right the
difference though with Bard and Bing is
Bard has a really good data set of the
whole web Google in theory has the
biggest index if you look at the most
popular social network it's not Myspace
if you look at you know a lot of the
early adopters like the most popular
search engine it's not I don't know
which one was the first one but it's not
Altavista or lycos or you know Yahoo or
whatever it may be a lot of the winners
were late comers and I still think we're
in the early Innings of AI and I do
agree it's going to change from that
aspect of how you search what I'm saying
is not going to change is they're still
going to make money they're going to
figure out how to monetize and as a
marketer we don't really care if someone
clicks on their website all we care
about is are we generating the revenue
and it's just a number we spent x on a
click here's a conversion rate and
here's how much revenue we made and
here's our cost for y dollars on the
same aspect it's like this is now
turning into like affiliate marketing we
spent X dollars they gave us a customer
and they dealt with all of it for us
even the conversion side and here was
our profit as long as the numbers work
as markers do we really care so there's
so there are a couple things in this
that I I wanted to punch on the first is
you're right first movers don't always
win right Google was the ninth search
engine I believe that got started and
really want to dominate the market share
the point you all are making in your
travel booking example is as some dude
who's just sitting listening to this
debate the play you're actually making
is that right now businesses bid on
keywords to have their ads appear and
what you're actually saying is no
they're going to bid directly on the
sale that hey you know I'm looking for a
flight between 400 450 dollars you have
to decide if you want to offer this
person a flight for that price right
there's going to be different people who
are going to uh you know different
airlines are going to have to decide
like am I willing to bid in at a certain
price because the chat bot is going to
just give them whatever the best price
is at the flight that is very different
than what's happening today I'm bidding
and selling this fixed cost thing it's
putting variable pricing into a lot of
companies that it's going to
disintermediate a lot of sellers out
there too but you know this better than
anyone else at HubSpot it's almost the
same model right now you are right we
are bidding on a keyword but we're all
back ending it out to a cost per
acquisition anyways right when we're
running our campaigns and tracking goals
and conversions totally it's yeah
there's a click but we're really looking
at what is our cost per conversion
whether it's a zapier or HubSpot it
doesn't matter the company we're all
looking at the same thing here's what it
costs to acquire a customer and here's
your LTV and here's a profit in the long
run what I'm saying is that what it
forces you to be great at economics and
unit economics and a lot of marketers
aren't so that's a big thing for
everybody watching is like well if
you're not close to the economics of
your Performance Marketing you're gonna
have to get much closer because that how
those transactions happen is going to
change a lot and two like in your flight
example it does kind of kill like
Expedia in a lot of the middle
middleware companies that are trying to
basically compete on price Arbitrage and
like bundling because the chatbot will
do that and the airlines can just offer
the airlines hotels what have you can
offer that direct so it's going to be
fascinating on the I think kind of core
like transactional search side of things
and in my opinion it's progression
Expedia kayak I use Kayak a lot I do
agree so why do I need a kayak if I'm
already searching on Google and then I'm
searching again on kayak it's like a
search going to another search engine as
a user I just want my ticket just give
it to me and if that means means Google
makes more money I know this sounds bad
people are going to say oh they're going
to be bigger more monopolistic and yada
yada but as a user it's more of an
easier experience I don't care exactly
that's what yeah that's kieran's
argument and booking.com they are like
the you know per month example of basic
AI right they are just the ability to
re-aggregate the aggregator like they
just re-aggregate Google to make it
easier to sort through and I think chat
is the ultimate aggregator of
aggregators because now it just actually
encapsulates all these things and
filters it all through for you just
gives you the thing you want the thing I
actually don't know like to your point
Kip I hadn't thought of that which is
the auction model moves to some sort of
price sensitivity in the background so
you actually in how do you get how do
you get chosen among all of those flight
providers why are you the one that gets
Chosen and that's the part I've actually
been trying to think through because
today you get chosen on an ads auction
model where you can like bid on the
keywords and actually win that auction
whereas when you bypass the need for the
keywords what do you what does the
auction model look like and maybe it is
hey every time that person has a certain
set of criteria that I can change
something in the background to be the
best fit for that criteria yeah you're
basically bidding on what you're self
willing to sell your product for and
trying to average it out over the long
run across a bunch of different queries
right and it becomes more efficient for
the business and the end user here's a
great example let's go back to the
travel one if you're looking for going
to LA to Japan and you want a Windows
seat and you want economy with extra leg
room and you want a TV you know on your
seat and you want these food options I'm
making this up yes there's a lot of
airlines that probably fly that route
but ones if the other airlines don't
have that seat available but they have
different seats they don't have to pay
for that cost right now they'll pay for
that click going to someone's website
and their conversions won't necessarily
be what they're looking for because like
oh we don't have that option so as a
business this is easier I'm only paying
for what I have I'm saving a lot of
money and time getting a lot of clicks
that aren't going to convert into the
first place well look that that's the
key Point here the more you move the
bidding and the ad experience closer to
the product and the product cost you're
going to increase your quality of
customer right and you're going to have
lower risk that you buy all these
potential customers that actually don't
want your product and I think it's going
to go one step further I think your
transaction is just going to happen on
Bing or I think it's going to happen on
Google and you're not going to even go
to the airline to transact and they'll
be like cool I don't know what Google
pay is it Google pay I don't know Google
calls theirs but Google or one of them
right or Apple pay like it literally is
going to be oh cool click you're done
there you got your information and
you're off into the races this is the
whole thing about the chat to be the app
store that's wild which is like why do I
go to any of these software providers
websites or even their apps when I can
just like interface with it through the
why do I go to instacart when I can just
like ask chat to be T to use instacart
for me why do I go to any of these
products when I can ask chat gbd to use
it for me now I've just commoditized
like every use user face and app because
I don't I don't actually care about any
of these apps I just care that they
exist as a plug-in yes and I don't want
to know about them I just want to know
my thing gets executed which actually
completely like open AI is now like the
aggregator of all these apps and it
commoditizes them and so it now actually
has a huge power over how to wheel that
in terms of your app getting picked over
another app and a lot of businesses are
scared but at the end of the day what's
going to make a business win is you do
what's best for the consumer like I
don't look at Expedia as doing what's
best for a consumer I just think they're
a middleman that just found inefficiency
in a marketing case and the first result
being Google where people go to or Bing
or wherever they need to fix that right
most people that I know because we've
done a lot of work for different travel
companies it's not like people like let
me just go to Delta Airlines and book
because not every Airline fly specific
routes sure if you already know what
airlines fly specific routes and you
only leave from one destination all
right you're gonna end up doing that for
a lot of people they're just looking at
like oh how I get to hear from this
location and if you end up as a business
build the best experience for the
customer ex like Amazon right if you
look at the behavior of young people not
like my parents generation but really
young people in their 20s and 30s they
don't go to the grocery store to buy
toilet paper they just go to Amazon like
toilet paper click subscribe come to
their house
they don't understand why parents go to
a grocery store to buy toilet paper like
this is inefficient and backwards but
they obsess about the customer they
provide the best experience I believe
it's going to come down to building the
best product or service for the end user
and having a really strong brand because
like if you think about Nike there's a
lot of shoes that build similar quality
shoes people love the brand if you look
at you know let's go back in the day I
think the HubSpot Founders invested in
David council's company I think it was
called Drift was it drift yeah it was
drift it was drift all right so I don't
know if most people know this you can do
a lot of the same stuff you can do in
drift and intercom on HubSpot for
cheaper right so what do people ended up
doing I know some of our companies we
just use your solution and you could say
oh you know drift does this or intercom
does this I'm like yeah HubSpot does it
and as an end user maybe drift has some
other features I don't know but for what
we needed you guys did it all and it was
cheaper it was bundled cheaper bundling
matters right to the end user and all
yes but but not just bundling it's all
one place so super convenient right more
specific and it was cheaper they could
offer 20 other features that you don't
have but if I don't need those features
it doesn't matter it's about delighting
the customer and that's what I was
getting at like with building a brand if
you have a strong brand and you're
delighting them and you're delighting
them like 98 or enough of the users
those edge cases for those two percent
doesn't matter with zapier you know how
many competitors are out there that do
exactly what zapier does some are even
cheaper we still use zapier why it's
just a brand and it works and we've been
using it forever and it's just known for
doing this like there's something to be
said for having a really easy to use
product clicking some buttons like I
have have on zapier and it just works
yeah convenience that's where businesses
will need to go yeah convenience and
price is really hard to beat